# What is BoxLang©?

**BoxLang** is a modern dynamic JVM language that can be deployed on multiple runtimes: all operating systems, web servers, Java application servers, AWS lambda, iOS, android, web assembly, and more.

BoxLang combines many features from different programming languages, including Java, ColdFusion, Python, Ruby, Go, and PHP, to provide developers with a modern, fluent and expressive syntax. BoxLang has been designed to be a highly modular and dynamic language to take advantage of all the modern features of the JVM.

Here are some key features of BoxLang

1. **Dynamic Language**: BoxLang is dynamically typed, meaning you don’t need to declare types if you don’t want to. It can do type inference, auto-casting and promotions between different types. The language adapts itself to its deployed runtime. It can add/remove/modify methods and properties at runtime. Making it highly flexible and adaptable.
2. **Low Verbosity Syntax:** BoxLang is a low-verbosity syntax language. It is highly functional, fluent, and human-readable. Our intent with BoxLang is to make it highly expressive and low ceremony.
3. **Scripting**: BoxLang can be used not only for enterprise modular applications but also for highly reusable and quick scripting on the JVM or Cloud Lambda architectures.
4. **InvokeDynamic:** BoxLang is built with a solid core foundation based on the InvokeDynamic features of the JVM. This makes the dynamic language extremely fast, predictable, and adaptable.
5. **Java Interoperability:** BoxLang is 100% interoperable with Java. You can extend and implement Java objects, use annotations, declare classes, imports, and more. Thanks to `InvokeDynamic` and our BoxLang `DynamicObject` core, everything in BoxLang is interoperable with Java.
6. **Pure Functions and Closures:** BoxLang supports the creation and usage of closures as a functional programming aspect. However, it also supports the concept of lambda pure functions that have no surrounding context access. Functions are first-class citizens in BoxLang, you can define them dynamically, pass them around and execute them whenever you want. This allows for BoxLang to be a highly functional language.
7. **Event Driven Language:** BoxLang has an event bus internally that can be used to extend the capabilities of the language or even your own applications. You can listen to almost every part of the language, parser and even the runtime or collaborate with your own events.
8. **Modular**: BoxLang has been designed internally to support the concept of BoxLang modules that can enhance every aspect of the language or your applications built with BoxLang. BoxLang is one of the very first languages you can build upon using modules. You can add new built-in functions, templating components, new/modify functions on existing classes, functionality, Runtime Debugger, AOP aspects, or listen to events within the language itself.
9. **Professional Open-Source:** BoxLang is a professional open-source project based on the Apache 2 license. Ortus Solutions supports every aspect of the language, and you can get a BoxLang+ subscription to not only professional support but also extended features and modular capabilities.
10. **Multi-Platform Development:** BoxLang has been designed to run on multiple platforms. This allows you to write adaptive code for any Operating System JVM, a servlet container web server, cloud lambda functions, iOS, Android, or even the browser via our web assembly package. BoxLang© builds upon its language core so it can be deployed on almost any running platform, present or future.
11. **Portable, Fluent, Human Scheduled Tasks:** BoxLang Scheduled Tasks Framework provides a centralized and portable way to define and manage scheduled tasks on your servers and applications. Source control your tasking with our scheduling DSL.
12. **ColdFusion/CFML Compatible:** BoxLang supports a dual parser and transpiler to execute ColdFusion/CFML code natively (maybe more languages later). This means that you can run all your ColdFusion applications within BoxLang natively. We also provide tooling to automatically transpile your ColdFusion code to BoxLang© as well if you have a + Subscription.
13. **Tooling:** We provide not only the core language but also several tools to help developers do their job with ease and power. We provide a Visual Studio Code extension for the language to provide syntax highlighting, code debugging, code insight, code documentation, formatting, LSP integration, and much more. Our + subscribers get even more tools like enhanced debuggers, ColdFusion/CFML transformers, and much more.
14. **Ecosystem:** Even though BoxLang is a new language, **it** already has an established ecosystem, since every Java and ColdFusion/CFML library works already with BoxLang. This was our priority when designing BoxLang, that it would automatically be able to integrate and run libraries from the Java and ColdFusion/CFML ecosystems. It ships with [CommandBox](https://www.ortussolutions.com/products/commandbox) as it’s package manager, server manager, task manager and REPL tool. Almost any project in [https://central.sonatype.com/](https://central.sonatype.com/) and[https://www.forgebox.io](https://www.forgebox.io) should work with BoxLang.
